.github/pull_request_template.md, before:

## What type of PR is this? (check all applicable)

- [ ] 🍕 Feature
- [ ] 🐛 Bug Fix
- [ ] 📝 Documentation
- [ ] 🧑‍💻 Refactor
- [ ] ✅ Test
- [ ] 🤖 Build or CI
- [ ] ❓ Other (please specify)

## Related Issue

Example: Fixes #123

## Describe this PR

A brief description of how this solves the issue.

## Screenshots

Please provide screenshots of the change.

## Alternative Approaches Considered

Did you attempt any other approaches that are not documented in code?

## Review Guide

Notes for the reviewer. How to test this change?

## Checklist before requesting a review

- 📖 Read the Field-TM Contributing Guide: <https://github.com/hotosm/field-tm/blob/main/CONTRIBUTING.md>
- 📖 Read the HOT Code of Conduct: <https://docs.hotosm.org/code-of-conduct>
- 👷‍♀️ Create small PRs. In most cases, this will be possible.
- ✅ Provide tests for your changes.
- 📝 Use descriptive commit messages.
- 📗 Update any related documentation and include any relevant screenshots.

## [optional] What gif best describes this PR or how it makes you feel?

Commit message:

ci: add cla signing workflow + update pull request template

.github/pull_request_template.md, after:

## What type of PR is this? (check all applicable)

- [ ] 🍕 Feature
- [ ] 🐛 Bug Fix
- [ ] 📝 Documentation
- [ ] 🧑‍💻 Refactor
- [ ] ✅ Test
- [ ] 🤖 Build or CI
- [ ] ❓ Other (please specify)

## Related Issue

Fixes #

## Describe this PR

A brief description of what this changes and why - in your own words.

## AI Tool Usage

- [ ] No AI tools were used
- [ ] AI tools were used (complete below)

**If AI-assisted:**

- Tool(s) used:
- What was generated:
- What you reviewed and changed:

## Screenshots

If applicable.

## Alternative Approaches Considered

Did you consider other approaches? Why this one?

## Review Guide

Notes for the reviewer. How to test this change?

## Checklist

- [ ] I have read the [Contributing Guide](https://github.com/hotosm/field-tm/blob/main/CONTRIBUTING.md)
- [ ] I have read the [Code of Conduct](https://docs.hotosm.org/code-of-conduct)
- [ ] PR is focused and small
- [ ] Tests are included or updated
- [ ] I understand all code in this PR and can answer questions about it
- [ ] No secrets, credentials, or sensitive data are included
- [ ] Commit messages are descriptive
- [ ] Related docs and screenshots are updated

## [optional] What gif best describes this PR or how it makes you feel?
