docs/DEV-1.-Getting-Started.md, before:

# Overview

The FMTM codebase consists of:

- An API backend in FastAPI (code in: `src/backend`)
- A frontend website (soon to be a PWA) in react (code in: `src/frontend`)

<img src="https://github.com/hotosm/fmtm/blob/main/images/dataflow.png?raw=true"  width=800 height= 800>

## Prerequisites for Contribution

### 1. Review documentation

Don't forget to review the [Contribution](https://github.com/hotosm/fmtm/wiki/Contribution) guidelines and our [Code of Conduct](https://github.com/hotosm/fmtm/wiki/Code-of-Conduct) before contributing!
Here are the steps to contribute to the frontend of Field Mapping Tasking Manager:

### 2. Fork the repository

Forking creates a copy of the repository in your own GitHub account.
Go to the [Field Mapping Tasking Manager repository](https://github.com/hotosm/fmtm) and click the "Fork" button in the top right corner of the page.

### 3. Navigate to your working directory

Open a terminal and navigate to the directory you want to work in using the following command:

`cd <work-dir>`

Make sure to replace `<work-dir>` with the name of your directory.

### 4. Clone the forked repository

Clone the forked repository to your local machine using the following command:

`git clone https://github.com/<your-username>/fmtm.git`

Make sure to replace `<your-username>` with your GitHub username.

### 5. Create a new branch

Create a new branch for your changes using the following command:

`git checkout -b branch-name`

Make sure to give your branch a descriptive name that reflects the changes you'll be making.

### 6. Make changes

Make your contribution, run tests where needed and save.

### 7. Add changes

Add the changes you've made using the following command:

`git add <file-name>`

Make sure you replace `<file-name>` with the name of the file you made changes to.

### 8. Commit and push

Once you've added changes, commit them to your local branch using the following command:

`git commit -m "Add feature"`

Make sure to write a descriptive commit message that explains the changes you've made. Then, push your changes to your forked repository using the following command:

`git push origin branch-name`

### 9. Submit a pull request

Go to your forked repository on GitHub and click the "Pull requests" tab.  
Change the base branch from `main` to `development`, select the branch that contains your changes from the compare branch, then click "Create pull request".  
This will open a new pull request in the fmtm repository, where you can describe your changes and request that they be merged into the main codebase.

> Note: After a PR has been approved and merged, if the branch is no longer in use, delete it both locally and remotely. Otherwise we get buried in dead branches we don't need.  
> Use the following commands:  
> Switch out of the branch you want to delete `git checkout <some-other-branch>`(_Replace `<some-other-branch>` with any other existing branch name_).  
> Delete the branch locally `git branch -d <branch-name>` and then delete the branch remotely `git push origin --delete <branch-name>`(_Replace `<branch-name>` with the name of the branch you want to delete_).

That's it! You've now contributed to the Field Mapping Tasking Manager.

## Development: Setup Your Local Environment

These steps are essential to run and test your code!

### 1. Setup OSM OAUTH 2.0

The FMTM uses OAUTH2 with OSM to authenticate users. To properly configure your FMTM project, you will need to create keys for OSM.

1. [Login to OSM](https://www.openstreetmap.org/login) (_If you do not have an account yet, click the signup button at the top navigation bar to create one_). Click the drop down arrow on the extreme right of the navigation bar and select My Settings.

2. Register your local fmtm backend app to OAuth 2 applications. Put your login redirect url as `http://127.0.0.1:8000/auth/callback/`, For Production replace the URL as production API Url

> Note: `127.0.0.1` is required instead of `localhost` due to OSM restrictions.

<img width="716" alt="image" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/36752999/216319298-1444a62f-ba6b-4439-bb4f-2075fdf03291.png">

3. Right now read user preferences permission is enough later on fmtm may need permission to modify the map option which should be updated on OSM_SCOPE variable on .env , Keep read_prefs for now.

4. Now Copy your Client ID and Client Secret. Put them in the `OSM_CLIENT_ID` and `OSM_CLIENT_SECRET` field of your `.env` file

### 2. Create an `.env` File

Environmental variables are used throughout this project. To get started, create `.env` file in the top level dir, Sample is `.env.example`

    cp .env.example .env

Your env should look like this

    ### ODK Central ###
    ODK_CENTRAL_URL=https://central-proxy
    ODK_CENTRAL_USER=`<any_valid_email_address>`
    ODK_CENTRAL_PASSWD=`<password_of_central_user>`

    ### FMTM ###
    # DEBUG=True
    # LOG_LEVEL=DEBUG
    API_URL=http://127.0.0.1:8000
    FRONTEND_MAIN_URL=http://localhost:8080
    FRONTEND_MAP_URL=http://localhost:8081
    # API_PREFIX=/api

    ### OSM ###
    OSM_CLIENT_ID=`<OSM_CLIENT_ID_FROM_ABOVE>`
    OSM_CLIENT_SECRET=`<OSM_CLIENT_SECRET_FROM_ABOVE>`
    OSM_URL=https://www.openstreetmap.org
    OSM_SCOPE=read_prefs
    OSM_LOGIN_REDIRECT_URI=http://127.0.0.1:8000/auth/callback/
    OSM_SECRET_KEY=<random_key_for_development>

    ### Database (optional) ###
    CENTRAL_DB_HOST=central-db
    CENTRAL_DB_USER=odk
    CENTRAL_DB_PASSWORD=odk
    CENTRAL_DB_NAME=odk

    FMTM_DB_HOST=fmtm-db
    FMTM_DB_USER=fmtm
    FMTM_DB_PASSWORD=fmtm
    FMTM_DB_NAME=fmtm'

## Verify Setup

### Check Deployment

For details on how to run this project locally for development, please look at: [DEV 2. Backend](https://github.com/hotosm/fmtm/wiki/DEV-2.-Backend)

### Check Authentication

Once you have deployed, you will need to check that you can properly authenticate.

1.  Navigate to `API_URL/docs`

    Three endpoints are responsible for oauth
    <img width="698" alt="image" src="../images/endpoints_responsible_for_auth_screenshot-2023-03-26-092756.png">

2.  Hit `/auth/osm_login/` : This will give you the Login URL where you can supply your osm username/password

    Response should be like this :

        {"login_url": "https://www.openstreetmap.org/oauth2/authorize/?response_type=code&client_id=xxxx"}

    Now Copy your login_url and hit it in new tab, and you will be redirected to OSM for your LOGIN. Give FMTM the necessary permission

    After successful login, you will get your `access_token` for FMTM Copy it and now you can use it for rest of the endpoints that need authorizations

3.  Check your access token: Hit `/auth/me/` and pass your `access_token` You should get your osm id, username and profile picture id

# Start Developing

Don't forget to review [Contribution](https://github.com/hotosm/fmtm/wiki/Contribution) guidelines and our [Code of Conduct](https://github.com/hotosm/fmtm/wiki/Code-of-Conduct) before contributing!

Commit message:

Updated and improved the Getting-started docs

docs/DEV-1.-Getting-Started.md, after:

# Overview

The FMTM codebase consists of:

- An API backend in FastAPI (code in: `src/backend`)
- A frontend website (soon to be a PWA) in react (code in: `src/frontend`)

<img src="https://github.com/hotosm/fmtm/blob/main/images/dataflow.png?raw=true"  width=800 height= 800>

## Prerequisites for Contribution

### 1. Review documentation

Don't forget to review the [Contribution](https://github.com/hotosm/fmtm/wiki/Contribution) guidelines and our [Code of Conduct](https://github.com/hotosm/fmtm/wiki/Code-of-Conduct) before contributing!
Here are the steps to contribute to the frontend of Field Mapping Tasking Manager:

### 2. Fork the repository

Forking creates a copy of the repository in your own GitHub account.
Go to the [Field Mapping Tasking Manager repository](https://github.com/hotosm/fmtm) and click the "Fork" button in the top right corner of the page.

### 3. Navigate to your working directory

Open a terminal and navigate to the directory you want to work in using the following command:

`cd <work-dir>`

Make sure to replace `<work-dir>` with the name of your directory.

### 4. Clone the forked repository

Clone the forked repository to your local machine using the following command:

`git clone https://github.com/<your-username>/fmtm.git`

Make sure to replace `<your-username>` with your GitHub username.

### 5. Create a new branch

Create a new branch for your changes using the following command:

`git checkout -b branch-name`

Make sure to give your branch a descriptive name that reflects the changes you'll be making.

### 6. Make changes

Make your contribution, run tests where needed and save.

### 7. Add changes

Add the changes you've made using the following command:

`git add <file-name>`

Make sure you replace `<file-name>` with the name of the file you made changes to.

### 8. Commit and push

Once you've added changes, commit them to your local branch using the following command:

`git commit -m "Add feature"`

Make sure to write a descriptive commit message that explains the changes you've made. Then, push your changes to your forked repository using the following command:

`git push origin branch-name`

### 9. Submit a pull request

Go to your forked repository on GitHub and click the "Pull requests" tab.  
Change the base branch from `main` to `development`, select the branch that contains your changes from the compare branch, then click "Create pull request".  
This will open a new pull request in the fmtm repository, where you can describe your changes and request that they be merged into the main codebase.

> Note: After a PR has been approved and merged, if the branch is no longer in use, delete it both locally and remotely. Otherwise we get buried in dead branches we don't need.  
> Use the following commands:  
> Switch out of the branch you want to delete `git checkout <some-other-branch>`(_Replace `<some-other-branch>` with any other existing branch name_).  
> Delete the branch locally `git branch -d <branch-name>` and then delete the branch remotely `git push origin --delete <branch-name>`(_Replace `<branch-name>` with the name of the branch you want to delete_).

That's it! You've now contributed to the Field Mapping Tasking Manager.

## Development: Setup Your Local Environment

These steps are essential to run and test your code!

### 1. Setup OSM OAUTH 2.0

The FMTM uses OAUTH2 with OSM to authenticate users. To properly configure your FMTM project, you will need to create keys for OSM.

1. [Login to OSM](https://www.openstreetmap.org/login) (_If you do not have an account yet, click the signup button at the top navigation bar to create one_). Click the drop down arrow on the extreme right of the navigation bar and select My Settings.

2. Register your local fmtm backend app to OAuth 2 applications. Put your login redirect url as `http://127.0.0.1:8000/auth/callback/`, For Production replace the URL as production API Url

> Note: `127.0.0.1` is required instead of `localhost` due to OSM restrictions.

<img width="716" alt="image" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/36752999/216319298-1444a62f-ba6b-4439-bb4f-2075fdf03291.png">

3. Right now read user preferences permission is enough later on fmtm may need permission to modify the map option which should be updated on OSM_SCOPE variable on .env , Keep read_prefs for now.

4. Now Copy your Client ID and Client Secret. Put them in the `OSM_CLIENT_ID` and `OSM_CLIENT_SECRET` field of your `.env` file

### 2. Create an `.env` File

Environmental variables are used throughout this project. To get started, create `.env` file in the top level dir, Sample is `.env.example`

    cp .env.example .env

Your env should look like this

    ### ODK Central ###
    ODK_CENTRAL_URL=https://central-proxy
    ODK_CENTRAL_USER=`<any_valid_email_address>`
    ODK_CENTRAL_PASSWD=`<password_of_central_user>`

    ### FMTM ###
    # DEBUG=True
    # LOG_LEVEL=DEBUG
    API_URL=http://127.0.0.1:8000
    FRONTEND_MAIN_URL=http://localhost:8080
    FRONTEND_MAP_URL=http://localhost:8081
    # API_PREFIX=/api

    ### OSM ###
    OSM_CLIENT_ID=`<OSM_CLIENT_ID_FROM_ABOVE>`
    OSM_CLIENT_SECRET=`<OSM_CLIENT_SECRET_FROM_ABOVE>`
    OSM_URL=https://www.openstreetmap.org
    OSM_SCOPE=read_prefs
    OSM_LOGIN_REDIRECT_URI=http://127.0.0.1:8000/auth/callback/
    OSM_SECRET_KEY=<random_key_for_development>

    ### Database (optional) ###
    CENTRAL_DB_HOST=central-db
    CENTRAL_DB_USER=odk
    CENTRAL_DB_PASSWORD=odk
    CENTRAL_DB_NAME=odk

    FMTM_DB_HOST=fmtm-db
    FMTM_DB_USER=fmtm
    FMTM_DB_PASSWORD=fmtm
    FMTM_DB_NAME=fmtm'

## Verify Setup

### Check Deployment

For details on how to run this project locally for development, please look at: [DEV 2. Backend](https://github.com/hotosm/fmtm/wiki/DEV-2.-Backend)

### Check Authentication

Once you have deployed, you will need to check that you can properly authenticate.

1.  Navigate to `http://127.0.0.1:8000/docs`

    Three endpoints are responsible for oauth
    <img width="698" alt="image" src="../images/endpoints_responsible_for_auth_screenshot-2023-03-26-092756.png">

2.  Select the `/auth/osm_login/` endpoint, click `Try it out` and then `Execute`.  
    This would give you the Login URL where you can supply your osm username and password.

    Your response should look like this:

        {"login_url": "https://www.openstreetmap.org/oauth2/authorize/?response_type=code&client_id=xxxx"}

    Now copy and paste your login_url in a new tab. You would be redirected to OSM for your LOGIN. Give FMTM the necessary permission.

    After a successful login, you will get your `access_token` for FMTM, Copy it. Now, you can use it for rest of the endpoints that needs authorization.

3.  Check your access token: Select the `/auth/me/` endpoint and click `Try it out`.  
    Pass in the `access_token` you copied in the previous step into the `access-token` field and click `Execute`. You should get your osm id, username and profile picture id.

# Start Developing

Don't forget to review [Contribution](https://github.com/hotosm/fmtm/wiki/Contribution) guidelines and our [Code of Conduct](https://github.com/hotosm/fmtm/wiki/Code-of-Conduct) before contributing!
